SEO:n perusteet ja hakukoneiden toiminta
Mikä on hakukoneoptimointi (SEO)?
Search Engine Optimization (SEO) is the process of optimizing a website to improve its rankings in search engine results pages (SERPs). The goal is to increase organic (non-paid) traffic from search engines by ensuring that the site appears prominently for relevant search queries.
On-page SEO (also called on-site SEO) involves optimizing the content of a webpage for higher rankings. The ultimate goal of on-page SEO is to help search engines understand the meaning and context of your pages and provide users with helpful content that satisfies their search intent.
Off-page SEO is about link building and other external signals that demonstrate the authority and trustworthiness of your site.
Technical SEO refers to optimizing the infrastructure of a website to ensure that search engines can crawl and index the site efficiently.
Miten hakukoneet toimivat (indeksointi, crawling, ranking)?
Search engines function in three primary stages:
Crawling – Search engines use bots (often called spiders or crawlers) to discover publicly available web pages. Crawling begins from the homepage and follows links to internal pages.


Indexing – Once a page is crawled, search engines process and organize the content to store in their database. Pages are evaluated based on content, structure, meta tags, and more.


Ranking – When a user performs a search, search engines use complex algorithms to rank pages in the index according to relevance, authority, content quality, user signals, and hundreds of other factors.


Technical SEO components related to crawling and indexing include:
robots.txt: Informs search engines which pages can or cannot be crawled.


noindex tags: Prevent specific pages from being included in the search index.


Canonical URLs: Solve duplicate content issues by identifying the preferred version of a page.


Crawl stats and errors: Use Google Search Console to check how frequently pages are crawled and whether there are any issues (e.g., 404 errors).


Sitemaps: XML sitemaps help guide search engines through important pages of the site.


Understanding how crawling and indexing work is essential to optimizing for search visibility.
SEO:n osa-alueet: On-page, Off-page ja tekninen SEO
On-page SEO
Includes all actions taken directly on the website to improve ranking:
Optimizing title tags and meta descriptions.


Using target and related keywords in content.


Structuring content with proper HTML tags (H1, H2, H3, etc.).


Using internal links with meaningful anchor text.


Adding descriptive ALT text to images.


Creating SEO-friendly URLs.


Enhancing page readability and formatting.


Including structured data (schema markup).


Ensuring a good mobile and user experience (UX).


Keeping content fresh and up to date.


Avoiding keyword cannibalization.


Off-page SEO
Focuses on external signals that influence search engine trust:
Building backlinks from authoritative websites.


Gaining mentions in online publications and social media.


Encouraging brand mentions that can be converted into backlinks.


Promoting high-quality, linkable content via email outreach or paid advertising.


Developing topical authority through content hubs and interlinked pages.


Technical SEO
Ensures the website is accessible and indexable:
Using HTTPS (SSL encryption) for secure browsing.


Optimizing site speed and Core Web Vitals (LCP, CLS, INP).


Fixing broken links and optimizing 404 pages.


Creating a clean and hierarchical website structure.


Using breadcrumb navigation and structured data.


Configuring canonical URLs correctly.


Using mobile-friendly and responsive design.


Minimizing crawl waste and managing indexing via robots.txt or meta tags.


Using hreflang for multilingual SEO.


Ensuring all pages can be accessed in fewer than 3 clicks.


Each of these three pillars (on-page, off-page, and technical SEO) must work together to ensure strong visibility in search engines.

Hakusana-analyysi ja hakuintentio
Hakusana-analyysin merkitys ja työkalut
Keyword research is the foundation of successful SEO. It helps determine what search terms users are typing into Google and ensures your content is relevant to those queries.
A keyword research tool like Semrush or Google Keyword Planner will indicate what queries people type in the Google Search Box. By including those keywords in your articles or pages, you make the content more relevant to your users and easier for search engines to understand.
Before publishing content (text, images, audio, or video), the first step is to do keyword research. This is necessary to determine what search terms users are typing in the search box and create content that satisfies their intent.
Once you decide on your target keywords, you should create a list of related keywords and long-tail keywords and use them in your titles, descriptions, headings, and page content.
There are various ways to find out which keywords are considered by Google relevant to your target keywords. The easiest and fastest way is to take advantage of three features provided by Google:
Google Suggest – the autocomplete suggestions that appear when typing in the search bar.


People Also Ask – common follow-up questions shown in search results.


Related Searches – queries shown at the bottom of the search page.


All you have to do is mention some of the above words in your content (without doing keyword stuffing).
Hakuintention ymmärtäminen ja hyödyntäminen
Google ranks pages with content that answers a user’s query, called search intent. For example, a search for “how to make sugar cookies” returns recipes and instructional videos, because the user intent is informational. In contrast, “buy sugar cookies” returns product pages because the intent is transactional.
There are four types of search intent:
Informational: The user is looking for information (“how many calories are in an egg?”).


Navigational: The user wants to go to a specific website or brand (“Facebook”).


Transactional: The user is ready to make a purchase (“buy coffee maker”).


Commercial: The user is researching before making a decision (“best SEO courses”).


Before thinking about on-page SEO, make sure that the content you create is what a Google searcher wants. Analyze the top-ranking pages for your target keywords to understand what type of content Google prefers.
Search behavior has changed and users need answers immediately. Don't bury the most important part of your content under unnecessary explanations or theories. Structure your content so that the most important information appears first.
If search results for your target keyword are filled with in-depth guides, don’t try to rank a product page. Likewise, if the results are filled with product pages from eCommerce websites, don’t try to rank an article. Match the format to the intent.
Pitkät avainsanat ja kilpailun arviointi
Many people believe that targeting high-volume keywords will get them more SEO traffic. However, high-traffic keywords are highly competitive, and if you are starting now (or have a relatively new website), you will never rank for those keywords.
You can realistically achieve good rankings and get organic traffic by targeting long-tail keywords. As their name implies, long-tail keywords are search queries with more than 2+ words. For example:
“SEO tips” (head keyword)


“SEO tips for beginners” (long-tail keyword)


These are more specific, less competitive, and easier to rank for. They also better match user intent.
Before deciding what topics to cover, do your research to discover:
What people type in the Google search box (via keyword tools).


What the top results look like (format, length, type).


Pro tip: Avoid dates in URLs (e.g., “best-seo-practices-for-2024”) to keep content evergreen.
Also, before you publish, check the current top 10 Google results for your target keywords. Examine:
Type of content


Level of detail


Use of media (images, video)


Page design


Your goal is to build something better — more informative, easier to read, better structured, or offering a unique angle.
Keyword cannibalization: tunnistus ja korjaaminen
Keyword cannibalization happens when multiple pages on your website target the same or very similar keywords. These pages end up competing against each other in the search results, confusing Google about which page to rank.
As a result, none of the pages may perform well, or the wrong page might rank.
Best Practices to Fix Keyword Cannibalization:
Each page should target a specific keyword.


If you have overlapping content, consider merging the pages into one.


Use a 301 redirect from the old page to the merged version.


Alternatively, use the canonical tag to signal which version to prioritize.


Perform a content audit regularly to identify and fix cannibalization.


Pro tip: As your site grows, keyword overlap becomes more likely. Export all your article titles into a spreadsheet and use AI tools (like ChatGPT) to identify which pages target similar topics.
Sisällön optimointi (On-Page SEO)
Laadukkaan sisällön periaatteet
When dealing with SEO, you always need to remember the following:
A website with brilliant content can do great with or without SEO.


A website with bad content will not survive with or without SEO.


A website with good content can become even better with SEO.


High-quality content has the following characteristics:
Original content (articles, text, images, videos, comments, etc.) – No copies or rewrites of existing articles.


Exclusive to your site – Even your own content must not be reused from other domains.


Text-supported – Add descriptions to non-text media like images and videos.


Helpful, people-first – Every piece of content should add value to the user.


Well-researched – Not quickly thrown together or shallow.


Unbiased – Fairly covers the topic from all angles.


Additionally, content must match search intent. Analyze the top Google results for your target keyword and evaluate:
Content format


Depth and structure


Use of visuals


User experience


Better content means being more comprehensive, easier to read, and more aligned with user expectations.
Sivun otsikot: H1–H6 ja niiden hierarkia
HTML headings (H1–H6) are critical to both user experience and SEO. They create a structure that search engines and readers can follow.
Best Practices:
Only one H1 tag per page – This typically reflects the main page title.


Use H2 for main sections, and H3–H6 for sub-sections.


Include relevant keywords in headings.


Think of headings as the structure of a book:


H1 = book title


H2 = chapters


H3 = sub-sections within chapters


Avoid vague headings. Use descriptive and informative headings to help skim-readers and to signal meaning to search engines.
Using headings effectively:
Makes content easier to read


Increases dwell time


Helps SEO algorithms understand content hierarchy


Avainsanojen sijoittelu ja käyttö sisällössä
Keywords help search engines associate your content with search queries. You should use both primary and related keywords naturally throughout your content.
Best Practices:
Use your main keyword in the opening paragraph and throughout the first few paragraphs.


Include keywords in headings and image ALT text.


Don’t stuff keywords; they should appear naturally.


Enrich content with related and long-tail keywords (from tools like Google Suggest, People Also Ask, and Related Searches).


Including keywords in early content helps:
Signal page relevance to search engines


Improve match with search intent


Keep readers engaged


Meta title ja meta description
Meta Title:
One of the most critical SEO factors.


Displayed in search results and social media previews.


Helps search engines understand what the page is about.


Best Practices:
Include target keywords near the beginning of the title.


Keep it under 60 characters to avoid truncation.


Use power words (e.g., best, ultimate, complete).


Use brackets (e.g., [Guide], [Checklist]) to improve CTR.


Avoid duplicate titles – make each unique.


Before publishing:
Search your keyword on Google


Analyze top-ranking titles


Create a unique, eye-catching alternative


Meta Description:
A summary shown in search snippets.


Though not a direct ranking factor, it affects CTR.


Best Practices:
Keep it under 160 characters.


Include target keywords (they may appear bolded).


For eCommerce: highlight product details (price, size, color).


Write unique meta descriptions for every page.


Even though Google may override your description, always write one—it helps with clarity and potential snippet inclusion.
Sisällön päivittäminen ja tuoreus (Content Freshness)
Google prefers content that is current, accurate, and complete. Outdated pages may fall in rankings over time.
Best Practices:
Review and update content regularly (at least twice a year).


Check for:


Accuracy


Broken links


Outdated graphics or data


Meta descriptions


New search intent shifts


Add:


New text or sections


Updated statistics or studies


Structured data enhancements


Use a "last updated" date for transparency.


Pro Tip:
If you've made significant updates and want Google to re-index the page quickly, use Google Search Console to request a recrawl.
If a page ranks:
Top 10: make only minor updates


Positions 10–30: perform optimization updates


No rankings or traffic: consider merging, redirecting, or noindexing


E-E-A-T: kokemus, asiantuntijuus, luotettavuus
E-E-A-T stands for:
Experience


Expertise


Authoritativeness


Trustworthiness


This concept is derived from Google’s Search Quality Rater Guidelines.
How to Demonstrate E-E-A-T in Content:
Experience: Show real use, testing, or interaction with the subject.


Include personal insight, data, experiments, or original media.


Expertise: Indicate qualifications or authority in the field.


Add author bios with credentials.


Authoritativeness: Build topical authority with interlinked, deep content.


Use content hubs and cornerstone pages.


Trustworthiness:


Secure your site (HTTPS)


Include About, Privacy, and Contact pages


Link to credible sources


Example: A review of a smartphone should include personal photos, performance data, and firsthand testing—not just specs copied from the manufacturer.
Improve E-E-A-T by:
Adding author bylines and bios


Publishing original content


Including reputable citations


Building a strong company or personal brand presence

Tekninen SEO
Sivuston indeksoitavuus: robots.txt, noindex
Robots.txt
The robots.txt file gives instructions to search engines about which pages or folders of your site they are allowed to crawl.
It resides in the root directory of your website.


Its format is simple, for example:

 makefile
KopioiMuokkaa
User-agent: *
Disallow: /private-folder/


While usually no modification is necessary, it is critical to ensure you are not accidentally blocking important pages from being crawled.
Use Google’s robots.txt Tester in Search Console to verify it.
Noindex Tag
The noindex tag is used to prevent specific pages from being indexed.
Place it in the <head> section of a page:

 html
KopioiMuokkaa
<meta name="robots" content="noindex">


Use cases for noindex:
Thank you pages


Pages used for ads (Google, Facebook)


Auto-generated tag pages


Use noindex for pages you want to keep accessible but exclude from search results.
Canonical tag ja päällekkäisen sisällön hallinta
The canonical tag (rel="canonical") tells search engines which version of a page should be indexed when multiple pages have similar or duplicate content.
Example:
html
KopioiMuokkaa
<link rel="canonical" href="https://example.com/preferred-page-url/" />

Why use it?
Prevent duplicate content issues


Consolidate ranking signals


Maintain SEO value across multiple URL versions


Every page on your site should include a canonical URL.
Use Google Search Console’s URL Inspection Tool to verify that canonical URLs are correctly interpreted.
Tip: If duplicate pages can be removed, use a 301 redirect instead. Use the canonical tag when pages must coexist.
XML-sivukartta ja sen optimointi
An XML sitemap is a file that lists the URLs of a website you want indexed by search engines.
Characteristics:
Should include only important pages


Helps with discovery and indexing


Includes the last modified date


Optimization Tips:
Do not include tag pages or duplicates.


Include pages, posts, and essential categories.


Ensure the sitemap is auto-updated when new content is added or modified.


Submit it to Google via Search Console.


Most CMSs (like WordPress) generate XML sitemaps automatically. If using plugins, ensure they include only content worth indexing.
HTTPS ja SSL-sertifikaatti
Having a valid SSL certificate and using HTTPS is both a ranking signal and a trust factor.
Best Practices:
Redirect all traffic from HTTP to HTTPS


Ensure all resources (images, CSS, JS) load via HTTPS


Use only one preferred domain version (e.g., https://www.example.com)


To verify HTTPS:
Visit your site in a browser


Click the padlock icon


Look for “Connection is secure” and “Certificate is valid”


If migrating from HTTP to HTTPS:
Use 301 redirects from all HTTP URLs


Update sitemap and internal links to use HTTPS


Add both HTTP and HTTPS versions to Google Search Console


Sivuston nopeus ja Core Web Vitals
Website speed is a confirmed ranking factor. Google emphasizes Core Web Vitals as essential for a good page experience.
Core Web Vitals Metrics:
LCP (Largest Contentful Paint): ≤ 2.5 seconds


CLS (Cumulative Layout Shift): ≤ 0.1


INP (Interaction to Next Paint): ≤ 200 ms


Optimization Tips:
Compress and optimize images


Use lazy loading for images and videos


Minimize CSS and JavaScript


Use a Content Delivery Network (CDN)


Implement caching


Reduce third-party scripts and unnecessary plugins


Use Google PageSpeed Insights and Search Console reports to identify and fix performance issues.
Fast-loading websites also convert better and reduce bounce rates, especially on mobile.
404-sivut ja rikkinäiset linkit
A 404 page appears when a requested URL doesn’t exist.
Best Practices for 404 Pages:
Should match your website’s design


Include a friendly message


Offer suggestions or links to key pages


Provide a link to the homepage or search


Finding Broken Links:
Use Google Search Console (404 errors report)


Use tools like Screaming Frog or W3C Link Checker


How to Fix:
Update internal/external links pointing to broken URLs


Use 301 redirects if the content was moved


If no replacement exists, show a custom 404 page


Broken links waste crawl budget and degrade user experience—monitor and fix them regularly.
Monikieliset sivustot ja hreflang
If your site has content in multiple languages, use the hreflang attribute to help search engines serve the correct version to users in different regions or languages.
Example:
html
KopioiMuokkaa
<link rel="alternate" hreflang="en" href="https://example.com/en/" />
<link rel="alternate" hreflang="fi" href="https://example.com/fi/" />

Best Practices:
Use hreflang in the <head> or via the sitemap


Ensure each language version is fully translated


Define x-default for fallback


Benefits:
Prevents duplicate content across languages


Improves international SEO targeting


Helps with correct indexing and ranking per region


This is a technical setup best handled via CMS plugins or developer support.
Mobiiliystävällisyys ja responsiivisuus
Google uses mobile-first indexing, meaning the mobile version of your site is what’s primarily used for ranking and indexing.
Best Practices:
Use a responsive design that adapts to screen sizes


Ensure content parity across desktop and mobile (same links, same text)


Optimize navigation and buttons for touch usability


Avoid intrusive popups and interstitials on mobile


Check your site with:
Google Mobile-Friendly Test


Lighthouse report (built into Chrome)


Ensure your site:
Loads in under 3 seconds on mobile


Displays well across all devices


Uses legible font sizes and properly sized touch elements


A poor mobile experience negatively impacts rankings and user engagement.

Sivustorakenne ja navigaatio
Sivuston rakenne ja hierarkia
The site structure is a very important SEO factor for multiple reasons:
It helps users navigate and find information quickly.


It helps search engines understand and index your website efficiently.


Google does take into account the overall site structure when evaluating individual pages. You should use a hierarchical structure where the homepage links to category pages, which in turn link to individual content pages.
Best Practices:
Ensure each page is accessible in less than 3 clicks from the homepage.


Use optimized category pages to group related content.


Structure your site like a tree:


Homepage → Category → Subcategory (if needed) → Page/Post


Include internal links to connect related content and signal content depth.


When search engine crawlers begin their process, they typically start from the homepage and follow internal links throughout the site.
A clear, logical structure improves both crawlability and user engagement.
URL-rakenteen optimointi
An optimized URL structure is essential for both users and search engines. It provides immediate context about the content and helps maintain clarity and organization.
Best Practices for URLs:
Use lowercase characters.


Use hyphens (-) to separate words.


Keep URLs short and descriptive.


Avoid using unnecessary characters (like numbers, symbols).


Include your target keyword, but avoid keyword stuffing.


Examples of good URLs:
https://www.reliablesoft.net/seo-tools


https://www.reliablesoft.net/search-engine-marketing


Examples of bad URLs:
https://www.reliablesoft.net/p?165


https://www.reliablesoft.net/123131/publish/data2/seo_Tips.html


Additional Tips:
Avoid including dates in URLs so they remain evergreen.


Strip out common stop words (like “and”, “the”, “in”).


Match your site structure to your URL structure:


For example, blog posts under /blog/ and products under /products/.


Breadcrumbs ja käyttäjäpolku
Breadcrumb menus are a set of internal links typically placed at the top of a page that show users their current position within the site’s hierarchy.
Why breadcrumbs matter:
Help users navigate back to higher-level pages.


Help search engines understand site structure.


Improve crawlability and internal linking.


May appear in Google search results, enhancing the snippet.


Example breadcrumb:
graphql
KopioiMuokkaa
Home > SEO > On-Page SEO > Headings

Best Practices:
Display breadcrumbs on all pages except the homepage.


Use structured data markup (schema.org) to help Google recognize them.


Ensure breadcrumbs match the site hierarchy and URL paths.


Breadcrumbs are explicitly recommended by Google and mentioned in their documentation as a helpful UX and SEO feature.
Navigoinnin merkitys UX:lle ja hakukoneille
Navigation plays a dual role: improving user experience (UX) and assisting search engines in crawling and indexing your content.
For Users:
Clear menus help visitors understand where they are and what’s available.


Efficient navigation reduces bounce rate and improves engagement.


Users are more likely to stay longer when they can find what they’re looking for quickly.


For Search Engines:
Well-structured navigation helps bots discover and prioritize pages.


Internal links in navigation pass link equity and signal importance.


Helps avoid orphan pages (pages with no internal links pointing to them).


Best Practices:
Use a main navigation menu that includes links to your most important pages.


Keep menu labels short and descriptive.


Ensure the navigation is mobile-friendly and works on all screen sizes.


Avoid JavaScript-heavy menus that are difficult for search engines to parse.


Include a footer menu for secondary navigation.


A well-optimized navigation system improves usability, accessibility, and SEO performance.

Linkityksen strategiat
Sisäinen linkitys ja ankkuritekstit
Internal linking is an essential SEO technique that helps search engines discover and index more pages of your website while also guiding users to related content.
Benefits of internal linking:
Helps Google understand site structure.


Distributes link equity across pages.


Increases time on site and reduces bounce rates.


Guides users toward conversion paths or related topics.


Best Practices:
Use meaningful anchor text that accurately describes the target page.


✅ Good: Become an SEO Expert


❌ Avoid: Click here or Read more


Link within the main body of the content, not just in footers or sidebars.


Aim for natural integration of links in context.


Don’t overdo it — keep links relevant and helpful.


Prioritize linking from high-authority pages to ones you want to improve.


Pro tip: If it’s difficult to include internal links naturally, create a "Further Reading" or "Related Articles" section and include full article titles with links.
You can also use tools or AI to assist:
“Provide a list of internal linking opportunities and suggest best anchor texts based on page content.”
Ulkoinen linkitys ja lähteet
An external link points to a different domain than your own. While backlinks are crucial for your site's authority, outbound links also play a role in establishing content credibility.
Best Practices for external linking:
Only link to reputable, authoritative websites.


Ensure the linked content is relevant and high-quality.


Use external links to support facts, cite studies, or provide deeper insights.


Avoid linking to low-quality or spammy sites.


Technical tips:
Use rel="nofollow" for:


Sponsored content


Affiliate links


Untrusted sources


Even though external links aren't a direct ranking factor, they:
Help Google understand your topical relevance.


Show you're part of a broader information ecosystem.


Contribute to trustworthiness when citing reputable sources.


Takalinkkien hankinta (backlinkit)
Backlinks (inbound links from other domains) remain one of the most powerful ranking factors in Google’s algorithm.
They serve as votes of trust from other websites. However, not all backlinks are equal.
High-quality backlinks come from:
Authoritative domains (high domain authority)


Relevant websites in your niche


Editorial placements (not paid or exchanged)


Content that earned the link organically


Best Practices:
Build relationships with people who might link to you.


Create linkable content assets:


Research studies


Original data


Case studies


Visuals and infographics


Use competitor backlink analysis tools to reverse-engineer what works in your industry.


Tips:
Use backlink tools (e.g., Ahrefs, Semrush) to:


Identify competitor backlinks


Analyze domains linking to specific content


Spot gaps in your backlink profile


Your aim is to produce content that is better than what’s already earning links — and then promote it strategically.
Maksetut linkit ja mainonta linkkien hankintaan
Relying solely on email outreach is no longer effective for link building. A modern strategy involves using paid advertising to promote linkable content to the right audience.
How to use ads for link building:
Promote statistics pages, research, or industry reports via:


Google Search Ads


LinkedIn Ads


Facebook Ads


Key points:
Avoid transactional keywords — target informational queries like:


“latest [industry] statistics”


“[topic] research report”


Costs are usually low since you're not competing with commercial bids.


The goal is to get your content in front of journalists, bloggers, and other content creators who are actively seeking sources to reference.
Example: A comprehensive SEO trends report may never rank on its own due to competition, but with targeted ads, it can reach writers who link to it as a source.
Brändimaininnat ja niiden muuttaminen linkeiksi
Unlinked brand mentions are references to your brand, product, or company name on other websites without a hyperlink.
These are link opportunities waiting to be claimed.
How to find them:
Set up Google Alerts for your brand name and product terms.


Use tools like Mention, Ahrefs, or Brand24 to monitor mentions.


Review industry blogs, forums, and news outlets regularly.


Outreach Strategy:
Identify the page and context where your brand is mentioned.


Reach out politely to the site owner or author.


Thank them for the mention and request a link to your homepage or a relevant page.


Offer something in return (e.g., a reciprocal mention, free resource, data, etc.).


Since they’ve already mentioned you, they’re more likely to comply with your request.
This tactic helps turn passive visibility into active SEO value by building legitimate backlinks.


Kuvien ja visuaalisen sisällön optimointi
Kuvien alt-tekstit ja tiedostonimet
ALT Text (Alternative Text)
ALT attributes (or “alt text”) are used to describe images to search engines and screen readers.
Best Practices:
Use descriptive alt text that explains the image’s purpose or content.


Include relevant keywords naturally.


Avoid keyword stuffing.


Write alt text as if you were describing the image to someone who cannot see it.

ALT text helps:
Improve image SEO (images can rank in Google Image Search)


Enhance accessibility for visually impaired users


Serve as fallback if the image doesn’t load


Image Filenames
Before uploading an image, rename the file to something meaningful and relevant to the page content.
Do:
seo-audit-checklist.png


responsive-design-example.jpg


Avoid:
IMG_1234.PNG


finalfinalNEW.jpg


Search engines read image filenames, so naming them correctly adds context and keyword relevance.
Kuvakoot ja pakkaus
Large image files can slow down page loading, which negatively impacts SEO and user experience.
Best Practices for Image Size and Compression:
Use appropriate formats:


JPEG for photos


PNG for graphics with transparency


WebP for next-gen compression and performance


Resize images before uploading:


Don’t upload a 3000px-wide image if it displays at 600px


Use image compression tools:


TinyPNG, ImageOptim, Squoosh


Aim to keep images under 100 KB when possible


Use lazy loading to delay loading images outside the viewport


Fast-loading images improve Core Web Vitals, especially Largest Contentful Paint (LCP).
Responsiiviset kuvat ja srcset
To optimize images for all screen sizes, use responsive image techniques like the srcset attribute.
Why it matters:
Ensures users only download the right-sized image for their device


Reduces unnecessary data usage on mobile


Improves load times and user experience on all devices


Also ensure your CMS or image plugin generates mobile-friendly versions of all media.
Bonus:
Use the picture element for art direction (changing image composition across breakpoints)


Combine with lazy loading and WebP support for maximum performance


Kuvien rooli SEO:ssa ja käyttökokemuksessa
Images serve more than just decoration — they:
Break up long blocks of text


Reinforce key messages


Improve content engagement and dwell time


Make content more shareable


Can generate image-based traffic from Google Image Search


SEO Advantages:
Well-optimized images contribute to on-page SEO


Boost page relevance and topical depth


Increase chances of being featured in Google Discover or rich snippets


UX Benefits:
Visual content helps users understand complex topics


Improves skimmability and content flow


Encourages social sharing when paired with appropriate meta images (Open Graph / Twitter Cards)


To fully benefit:
Pair visuals with explanatory text or captions


Use structured image placement (next to relevant content)


Ensure consistency in style and quality


A well-optimized image improves both SEO performance and user satisfaction — and when combined with fast load times and proper tagging, it contributes to the overall success of the page.

Rich Snippets ja strukturoitu data
Mikä on strukturoitu data ja miksi sitä käytetään?
Structured data is a standardized format for providing information about a page and classifying the page content.
It helps search engines understand the context of your content and enables enhanced search features such as:
Rich Snippets (stars, prices, review counts)


Knowledge panels


Featured Snippets


Event listings


Video previews


Structured data is typically added to a webpage using JSON-LD format in the <head> section.
Benefits of using structured data:
Improves click-through rates (CTR) by enhancing visibility in SERPs.


Helps with voice search compatibility.


Enables your content to appear in Google Discover and Knowledge Graph features.


Assists search engines in interpreting:


Reviews


Products


Recipes


FAQs


Events


Articles


Google strongly recommends the use of structured data to make content eligible for advanced search result features.
Rich Snippets, Featured Snippets ja AI Overviews
Rich Snippets
Rich Snippets are enhanced search results that include extra visual elements like:
Star ratings


Product prices and availability


Author name and publication date


Event times and locations


They are generated based on structured data embedded in your HTML.
Examples of Rich Snippets include:
⭐⭐⭐⭐ Review snippets


📦 Product details (price, stock)


📅 Event listings


🍽️ Recipe info (prep time, calories)


These snippets improve visual appeal in search results and can significantly increase CTR.
Featured Snippets
Featured Snippets are selected search results that appear at the top of Google's organic results in a special box.
They aim to directly answer the user’s query and are extracted from high-ranking pages.
Types of Featured Snippets include:
Paragraphs (definitions, answers)


Lists (steps, rankings)


Tables (comparisons, data)


They are not controlled via structured data but optimizing content structure (clear headers, concise answers) can help win them.
AI Overviews (SGE)
AI-generated answers (like Google's Search Generative Experience) may pull content from structured sources or well-optimized content blocks.
Structured data enhances the machine readability and potential inclusion in AI-generated results.
While SGE is still evolving, having well-structured, clear content with schema markup increases visibility.
Schema.org-merkintätyypit
Schema.org is a collaborative community developed by major search engines to create a shared vocabulary for structured data.
Common Schema Types:
Article – For blog posts, news, and editorial content


Product – For product details, price, availability


Review – For customer or expert reviews


Recipe – For food recipes with ingredients and prep time


Event – For upcoming events with date and location


FAQPage – For pages with multiple questions and answers


BreadcrumbList – For breadcrumb navigation


Organization / LocalBusiness – For company information


VideoObject – For video content metadata


Each schema type has specific properties (e.g., name, author, image, ratingValue, etc.).
How to implement:
Use JSON-LD format, recommended by Google


Embed it within the <script type="application/ld+json"> tag in the <head> or body


You can generate schemas manually or with plugins (e.g., Yoast, Rank Math, Schema App)


Pro tip: Avoid fake or misleading markup—Google penalizes abuse.
Tietojen testaaminen ja validointi
Structured data must be correctly implemented to be effective.
Tools for testing:
Google Rich Results Test


Checks if your structured data is eligible for rich features in search results


https://search.google.com/test/rich-results


Schema Markup Validator (by Schema.org)


Validates syntax and detects errors


https://validator.schema.org/


Google Search Console Enhancements Report


Shows structured data types found on your site


Flags errors or warnings related to markup


Best Practices:
Fix all critical errors and warnings


Test before publishing or after deploying site updates


Keep markup up to date as schema standards evolve


Add only markup that reflects the visible content on the page


Valid and meaningful structured data boosts your chances of standing out in search — and staying visible as search evolves.


Edistynyt SEO ja taktiikat
Sisältöklusterit ja topical authority
Topical authority refers to your site’s perceived expertise and depth on a specific subject.
Building topical authority requires publishing multiple interlinked pieces of content around a core theme.
Content Clusters Strategy:
Create pillar content: A comprehensive guide or overview of a topic.


Create cluster content: Supporting articles covering subtopics in-depth.


Link all supporting articles to and from the pillar page using internal links.


This creates a strong content structure that:
Helps Google understand the topical relevance of your site.


Improves keyword coverage and semantic relationships.


Increases time on site and guides users through related content.


Example: A pillar page on “Technical SEO” may be supported by clusters like “Crawl Budget,” “Indexing,” “Core Web Vitals,” etc.
Use tools like internal link checkers or even AI suggestions to discover orphan pages and strengthen topic clusters.
AI-sisällön käyttö ja riskit
AI-generated content can be used to scale production, but it must be reviewed, fact-checked, and edited.
Risks of using AI content:
Can be inaccurate or generic.


May lack personal experience or originality, which is critical for E-E-A-T.


Could be flagged by Google if deemed low quality or spammy.


Best Practices:
Use AI for drafting, outlining, or generating ideas.


Ensure manual review and human enhancement before publishing.


Add personal insights, examples, data, and original visuals.


Monitor performance and feedback carefully.


Google’s stance: AI content is not inherently bad — what matters is quality and whether it provides value to users.
Zero-click-hauista hyötyminen
Zero-click searches occur when users get their answer directly on the SERP and never click through.
While this may seem like lost traffic, these searches present an opportunity to build visibility and authority.
How to benefit:
Structure your content with concise definitions, lists, and tables to win Featured Snippets.


Use FAQ sections with schema markup to increase snippet exposure.


Provide direct answers near the top of your content.


Include longer-tail keyword variants that may trigger voice search or Google Assistant results.


Optimization tactics:
Use clear H2 or H3 subheadings followed by short answers.


Include "What is...", "How to...", and "Best..." phrasing.


While not all searches lead to clicks, you can still influence perception and guide brand discovery.
Google Discover -optimointi
Google Discover is a feed-based feature that suggests content based on user interests, search history, and behavior — not keywords.
Best Practices:
Use high-quality featured images (minimum 1200px width).


Avoid clickbait titles — focus on relevant, emotional, or curiosity-driven headlines.


Ensure content freshness: regularly update and republish posts.


Match E-E-A-T standards: experience, expertise, authority, trust.


Use schema markup to help classify content type (e.g., NewsArticle, BlogPosting).


Discover traffic is highly variable, but successful content often shares traits:
Emotionally engaging


Visually appealing


Topical or newsworthy


Regularly maintained


Technical tips:
Enable AMP or configure the max-image-preview:large meta tag.


Monitor Discover traffic in Google Search Console under the “Performance > Discover” section.


Crawl-raporttien analysointi ja budjetin hallinta
Crawl budget is the number of pages Googlebot is willing and able to crawl on your site during a given timeframe.
Why crawl budget matters:
Wasted budget means important pages may not be indexed.


Large sites (e.g. 10,000+ URLs) are especially affected.


Reducing unnecessary crawling improves indexing efficiency.


Analyze with Google Search Console:
Use the Crawl Stats report to monitor:


Total crawl requests


Response codes (e.g., 404s)


Crawl time and average response time


Host status issues


Optimize crawl efficiency by:
Blocking unimportant or duplicate pages with robots.txt or noindex


Fixing broken links (404s) and redirect loops


Avoiding faceted navigation or URL parameters that generate infinite pages


Using canonical tags to consolidate duplicates


Ensuring sitemap includes only key pages


For large sites, optimizing crawl budget can significantly improve discovery, indexing, and ultimately rankings.

Optimointi tekoälyä varten
Johdanto: AI muuttaa hakukoneoptimointia
Generatiivinen tekoäly (GenAI) on muuttamassa hakukonekäyttäytymistä. ChatGPT, Gemini, Claude ja Perplexity eivät enää vain täydennä hakua — ne toimivat itsenäisinä hakukoneina. Google AI Overviews tuo tekoälyvastaukset suoraan hakutuloksiin, usein ennen perinteisiä linkkejä.
Et ole enää optimoimassa vain Googlea varten. Suuret kielimallit (LLM) ovat uuden tiedonetsinnän portinvartijoita. Nämä tekoälyllä toimivat hakukoneet tarjoavat suoria vastauksia ja suosittelevat brändejä, joita pitävät luotettavina.
AIO ei korvaa SEO:ta — se laajentaa sitä. On aika optimoida sekä perinteiseen hakukoneeseen että tekoälyn tuottamiin tuloksiin.

Mikä on AI-haku ja miten se toimii?
AI-hakukoneet ovat LLM-malleihin perustuvia alustoja, joita käytetään tiedon etsintään ja ostopäätösten tukemiseen. Näitä ovat esim. ChatGPT, Claude, Gemini, Grok ja Llama. Myös Perplexity ja Microsoft Copilot toimivat AI-hakukoneina.
AI-hakukoneet muodostavat vastauksensa kahdesta lähteestä:
Koulutusdata: Kirjat, artikkelit, keskustelut, koodi jne.
Reaaliaikainen haku: Reddit, blogit, YouTube, Capterra, G2, Trustpilot jne.
Tekoäly ei nosta esiin pelkästään parhaiten sijoittuvia hakutuloksia, vaan sisältöä, joka on selkeästi kirjoitettu, hyvin rakenteistettu ja esiintyy usein luotettavissa yhteyksissä.

AI Overviews (Google): Näkyvyyden mahdollisuudet ja haasteet
Google AI Overviews (AIO) on SERP:n ominaisuus, joka antaa tekoälyn generoimia vastauksia suoraan hakutulossivulla. Nämä yhdistävät vastauksia useista lähteistä, jotka usein linkitetään AIO:n alapuolelle.
AIO:t lisäävät ns. zero-click-hakuja, koska käyttäjä saa vastauksen vierailematta sivustolla. Niissä mainitut sivut saattavat kuitenkin näkyä ja rakentaa brändin tunnettuutta, vaikka liikennettä ei syntyisi.
92 % AIO-sisällöstä viittaa sivuun, joka jo sijoittuu Googlen top 10 -orgaanisiin tuloksiin. Featured Snippets esiintyy AIO:n kanssa yli 30 % hauista, ja People Also Ask -laatikot yli 66 % hauista.

Miten sisältö pääsee mukaan AI-hakutuloksiin
AI Overviews ja GenAI-mallit suosivat:
Luetteloita (bullet- tai numeromuotoisia)
Alalukuja ja kysymyspohjaisia otsikoita
Lyhyitä ja suoria vastauksia heti alussa
Scannattavaa rakennetta: listoja, lyhyitä kappaleita, kuvia, videoita, infograafeja
Sisältöä, jossa on takeaway- tai yhteenvetokohtia
Sisältön tulee olla heti ymmärrettävää ja tarjoilla keskeiset vastaukset heti alkuun.

Sisältöstrategia AI-optimointiin
AI:n kannalta paras sisältö palvelee eri vaiheita ostopolulla:
TOFU: "Mikä on..." / "Kuinka..."
Ohjeet, oppaat, määritelmät
MOFU: Vertailut, käyttötapaukset
Esim. "Tool X vs Tool Y", todelliset tarpeet ja esimerkit
BOFU: "Parhaat X-työkalut"
Lista-artikkelit, tuotepainotteinen sisältö
Kaikissa sisältötyypeissä tulisi vastata oikeisiin kysymyksiin oikealla tavalla ja oikeassa muodossa.

Sisällön laatu ja E-E-A-T
AI suosii sisältöä, joka osoittaa kokemusta ja asiantuntemusta:
Kirjoittajaprofiilit ja biosit
Asiantuntijalausunnot ja haastattelut
Läpinäkyvä lähdeviittaus
Linkit luotettaviin ulkopuolisiin sivustoihin
Brändin näkyvyys ja aktiivisuus esim. medioissa, sosiaalisessa mediassa ja tapahtumissa

Tekninen AI SEO
Keskeisiä teknisiä elementtejä:
Schema.org-markupit: FAQPage, HowTo, Product, Article, Review, VideoObject
Robots.txt ja GPTBot-yhteensopivuus
Crawlability: sivustorakenne, sitemap, sisäinen linkitys, ei orpoja sivuja
Video SEO: YouTube, transcriptit, VideoObject-schema
HTTPS, mobiilioptimointi, latausnopeus

Vektoripohjainen optimointi (edistynyt aihe)
Vektorien (embedding) avulla voidaan mitata semanttista yhteensopivuutta:
"Miten lähellä" sisältösi on AI:n odottamaa vastausta
Hyvä yhteensopivuus > 0.8 cosine similarity
Sovelluksia: keyword clustering, duplicate detection, content gap analysis, internal linking, benchmarking

Miten päästä mukaan AI:n suosituslistoihin
AI suosittelee sisältöjä, jotka:
Esiintyvät usein Redditissä, LinkedInissä, blogeissa
Ovat mukana vertailuissa ja arvosteluissa (G2, Capterra)
Ovat selkeästi positioitu (kuka hyötyy, miksi juuri tämä tuote)
Sisältävät listoja tai tuoteluetteloita (myös omia "best tools for X" artikkeleita)
Saavat mainintoja vaikuttajilta tai aggregaattisivustoilta

Miten käyttää AI:ta oman sisällön kehittämiseen
AI voi auttaa:
Sisältöideoiden, otsikoiden ja rakenteen kehittelyssä
Prompt-tarkistuksessa: "Tiivistääkö AI viestini oikein?"
Kilpailija-analyysissä ja markkinatutkimuksessa

Miten mitata onnistumista AI-SEO:ssa
Referral-liikenne AI-työkaluista (chat.openai.com, perplexity.ai jne.)
Brändihakujen nousu
GenAI-sitaatit ja maininnat — ota ruutukaappauksia
Backlinkit AI-genereoiduista sisällöistä
Engagement-signaalit: Time on page, scroll depth, klikit jne.
Emerging tools: AI visibility -seuranta (esim. Dark Visitors)

Tulevaisuus: SEO + AI rinnakkain
SEO ei ole kuollut — se muuttuu. AI laajentaa hakua uusille alustoille ja muuttaa sisällön valintakriteereitä. Tulevaisuudessa sisältön tulee olla yhtaikaa:
Laadukasta ja asiantuntevaa (SEO)
Rakenteellisesti selkeää ja tarkoitukseen osuvaa (AI)
Aikainen liikkeelle lähtijä saa etulyöntiaseman — mutta vain, jos SEO ja AI-optimointi yhdistetään strategisesti.


